A quantum logic gate between a solid-state quantum bit and a photon
Hyochul Kim1, Ranojoy Bose1, Thomas C. Shen1, Glenn S. Solomon2 & Edo Waks1, 2,*
(1)

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, IREAP, University of

Maryland, College Park and Joint Quantum Institute, University of Maryland, College
Park, Maryland 20742, USA
(2)

Joint Quantum Institute, National Institute of Standards and Technology, and

University of Maryland, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899, USA
*

edowaks@umd.edu

Integrated quantum photonics provides a promising route towards scalable solidstate implementations of quantum networks1, quantum computers2,3, and ultra-low
power opto-electronic devices4,5. A key component for many of these applications is
the photonic quantum logic gate, where the quantum state of a solid-state quantum
bit (qubit) conditionally controls the state of a photonic qubit. These gates are
crucial for development of robust quantum networks6-8, non-destructive quantum
measurements9,10, and strong photon-photon interactions11. Here we experimentally
realize a quantum logic gate between an optical photon and a solid-state qubit. The
qubit is composed of a quantum dot (QD) strongly coupled to a nano-cavity, which
acts as a coherently controllable qubit system that conditionally flips the
polarization of a photon on picosecond timescales, implementing a controlled-NOT
(cNOT) gate. Our results represent an important step towards solid-state quantum
networks and provide a versatile approach for probing QD-photon interactions on
ultra-fast timescales.
QDs are robust and spectrally narrow quantum emitters that have attracted significant
interest as solid-state qubits. Various approaches have been pursued for storage and
manipulation of quantum information in QDs. One approach has been to exploit neutral
exciton transitions that can be controlled all-optically to enable both single qubit
operations as well as two-qubit operations between distinguishable excitons in a QD12.
More recently, major progress has been achieved in coherently manipulating highly

1

stable spin states of a charged QD, which promise significantly longer coherence times1317

.

Another important property of QDs is that they can be coupled to optical nano-cavities in
the strong coupling regime18-21 where a QD can modify the cavity spectral response22,23,
enabling novel applications such as ultra-fast low photon number optical switching24-26
and single QD lasing27. Furthermore, the strong coupling regime can be exploited to
interface these solid-state qubits with a flying photonic qubit through direct QD-photon
quantum logic operations, as proposed in a number of theoretical works6-8. In order to
realize this capability, three essential requirements must be met. First, the QD must
possess two quantum states whose coherence time is long compared to the interaction
time with the photonic qubit. Second, the qubit states of the QD must be coherently
controllable. Finally, the qubit state of the QD must have a strong effect on the quantum
state of the photon. Achieving these requirements in a solid-state photonic platform has
remained an outstanding challenge.
In this letter we demonstrate that a QD strongly coupled to an optical nanocavity can
satisfy all of the above requirements, implementing a solid-state qubit in a cavity system
that can perform quantum gates on a photon at picosecond timescales.

We

experimentally demonstrate a cNOT logic gate between the QD and a photonic qubit,
which is a universal quantum operation that can serve as a general light-matter interface
for remote entanglements and distributed quantum computation. Our device is composed
of an indium arsenide (InAs) QD strongly coupled to a photonic crystal cavity. Fig. 1a
illustrates the level structure of an InAs QD, which includes a ground state (|g) and two
bright exciton states, labelled |+ and |-, representing the two anti-aligned spin
configurations of the electron and hole. The optical transitions from the ground state to
the two bright excitons, denoted + and -, exhibit right and left circularly polarized
emission respectively at high magnetic field. For all measurements performed in this
work the biexciton transition is significantly detuned and can therefore be ignored,
enabling the QD to be treated as a three-level system. By applying a magnetic field in the
sample growth direction (Faraday configuration), the + transition can be tuned on
resonance with the cavity while the - transition remains detuned28. In this configuration,
2

states |g and |- are the qubit states of the QD, while the + transition is used to couple
the qubit to a photon. The cavity serves the dual role of creating a photonic interface
through cavity reflectivity modification22,23 via the + transition, and suppressing the
spontaneous emission of the - transition to timescales that are long compared to the QDphoton interaction time.
Fig. 1b shows a scanning electron micrograph (SEM) image of the fabricated device used
to implement a qubit-photon gate, which is composed of a photonic crystal defect cavity
coupled to an InAs QD (see Methods and Supplementary section 1 for details on device
design and fabrication).

Quantum interactions between the QD and a photon are

achieved by utilizing the strong dependence of the photonic crystal cavity reflection
coefficient on the qubit state of the QD22,23. Photonic crystal cavities exhibit high-Q
modes that have a well-defined polarization.

The photonic qubit encodes quantum

information using the polarization states |H and |V which are rotated 45°relative to the
polarization axis of the cavity. These qubit states can be expressed in the polarization
basis that is parallel and orthogonal to the cavity axis, denoted |x and |y respectively,
using the relations H   x  y  / 2 and V   y  x  / 2 .

Upon reflection

from the sample surface, the photonic qubit states will be transformed to the states

H   r x  y  / 2 and V   y  r x  / 2 where r is the cavity reflection
coefficient. This reflection coefficient can be directly calculated from the HeisenbergLangevin equations of motion (see Supplementary section 2). If the photon is resonant
with the cavity mode and the QD is in state |- (Fig. 1c bottom), the system behaves like a
bare cavity and r = -1. The photonic qubit therefore experiences a bit flip ( H  V
and V  H ). If, however, the QD is in state |g (Fig. 1c top), the optical transition to
the |+ state will strongly modify the reflection coefficient. For the special case where
both the photon and the + transition are resonant with the cavity, the reflection
coefficient becomes r  (C  1) / (C  1) , where C=2g2/ is the atomic cooperativity.
The parameters g,  and  represent the cavity-QD coupling strength, cavity energy decay
rate, and exciton decay rate for the + transition respectively. In the limit that C>>1,

3

which is expected in the strong coupling regime, we have r  1 and therefore the
photonic qubit remains unchanged ( H  H and V  V ). Thus, the state of the
QD determines whether the photonic qubit will experience a bit flip, which implements a
complete cNOT logic gate.
The fabricated device was initially characterized under continuous wave (cw) excitation
where the cavity spectrum was measured using a broadband LED as a white light source
(see Methods). Fig. 2a plots the cavity reflection spectrum as a function of magnetic
field. The spectrum was attained using a cross-polarization configuration where the input
field was vertically polarized and the reflected field was analysed in the horizontal
direction. At 0 T, the spectrum shows a bright peak due to the cavity along with a second
peak due to the QD that is blue detuned from the cavity resonance by 0.11 nm. As the
magnetic field is increased, the QD line splits into two peaks corresponding to +
transition (red shift) and - transition (blue shift). As the + transition is tuned through
the cavity resonance, a clear anti-crossing between the cavity and QD line is observed,
which is an indication of strong coupling.

Fig. 2b is a high spectral resolution

measurement performed using a tunable narrowband laser at 1.6 T (see Methods), when
the + transition is resonant with the cavity, along with a numerical fit to a theoretical
model (see Supplementary Section 3). From the numerical fit we determine g/2π=12.9
GHz and /2π=31.9 GHz (Q=10,200). The measured values of g and  satisfy the strong
coupling condition g   / 4 , demonstrating that the device operates in the strong
coupling regime18,19,22.
To populate the |- state, a tunable narrowband laser was used to excite the sample while
simultaneously probing the cavity spectrum with the broadband LED. Fig. 2c shows the
broadband LED spectrum as a function of detuning between the pump laser and the transition (L/2) using a pump power of 1.8 µW (measured before the objective lens).
A clear modification of the spectrum is observed when the pump laser becomes resonant
with the - transition. Figures 2d-f plot the measured spectrum for the specific laser
detunings of 10, 0, and -10 GHz respectively. At 0 GHz detuning, the central dip in the
cavity spectrum is suppressed due to incoherent pumping of the QD into the |- state
4

where the QD is decoupled from the cavity mode. This suppression quickly vanishes at
both red and blue detuned pump wavelengths.
In order to demonstrate quantum gate operation we utilize short optical pulses to
coherently prepare the initial qubit state of the QD as well as to generate the photonic
qubit. The lifetime of the |- state was measured to range from 230 ps to 460 ps
depending on cavity detuning (see Supplementary Section 4).

Experiments were

performed using a 10 ps pump pulse and a 75 ps probe pulse, which are short compared
to this timescale. The pump pulse was used to induce Rabi oscillation on the - transition
in order to coherently prepare the initial qubit state of the QD, while the weak probe
served as the photonic qubit (see Methods). The probe pulse duration was selected to
ensure that its spectrum was narrower than the spectral dip in Fig. 2b.
Measurements were first performed by setting the incident probe polarization to be
vertically polarized, and measuring the reflected probe intensity along the horizontal
polarization axis. Fig. 3a plots the reflected probe intensity as a function of √ , where P
is the average pump power. The blue circles plot the intensity for an 80 ps pump-probe
delay, while the red squares show measurements for a pump-probe delay of 4 ns which is
much longer than the lifetime of the |- state. As the pump power is increased, a clear
oscillatory behaviour is observed for 80 ps delay. This sinusoidal behaviour is attributed
to Rabi oscillation of the QD between the ground state and the |- state. The  pulse
condition is achieved at an average pump power of 0.12 µW. In contrast, no oscillation is
observed when the delay is set to 4 ns because the QD has had sufficient time to decay to
the ground state after it was excited. The contrast of the Rabi oscillations is observed to
decrease with pump intensity, which is in agreement with previous measurements on
single excitons, and has been attributed to phonon mediated excitation induced
dephasing29,30.
The full time-resolved reflection spectrum was obtained by tuning the probe beam
frequency across the cavity resonance. Figures 3b-e show the measured probe intensity
for the 0, , 2, and 3 pump pulse condition respectively for both 80 ps and 4 ns delay.
The measured spectrum for 80 ps delay oscillates from the bare cavity to the cavity-QD

5

coupled spectrum depending on the pump power, demonstrating full control of the cavity
reflectivity by coherent manipulation of the qubit state. The relative change in intensity
induced by changing the QD from the |- state (80 ps delay) to the |g state (4 ns delay),
when the probe is on cavity resonance and the pump is at the  pulse condition (Fig. 3c),
is (Imax-Imin)/Imax=60±2%. The reduction in contrast in comparison to Fig. 2b is attributed
to the finite bandwidth of the probe pulse which is measured to be 4.2 GHz using a
narrowband Fabry-Perot cavity filter. Solid lines represent theoretical fits (see
Supplementary section 5). The blue curves in Fig. 3c and 3e represent the ideal bare
cavity spectra when the QD is excited to the |- state with unity probability. For 80 ps
delay in Fig. 3c, the measured signal at cavity resonant wavelength (920.97 nm) achieves
95% of the maximum predicted value denoted by the blue curve. From this value, the
probability of the QD being excited to the |- state after a  pulse is calculated to be
0.93±0.04 (see Supplementary section 5). The small reduction from unity probability is
attributed to spontaneous decay of |- state that may occur before the photonic qubit has
finished interacting with the cavity.
To map out the complete relation between the photon polarization and the QD qubit state,
Fig. 4 shows pump-probe measurements performed for the four possible combinations of
input and output photon polarizations (see Methods). The probe beam frequency was
tuned over the cavity resonance while pumping the - transition of the QD with a -pulse.
The pump-probe delay was set to either 80 ps or 4 ns, which correspond to the cases
where the QD is in state |- or |g respectively. Fig. 4a plots measurement results taken
under identical conditions used to obtain Fig. 3c, with the exception that the probe
intensity was measured in the vertical polarization direction. In this case, the conjugate
effect is observed. When the QD is in state |- (80 ps delay), the bare cavity spectrum is
observed as an anti-resonance instead of a resonance. Similarly, when the QD is in state
|g (4 ns delay), we observe the conjugate cavity-QD coupled spectrum where the
measured intensity exhibits a peak at the QD resonant frequency instead of a dip. This
conjugate behaviour indicates that when more light is transmitted through the PBS less
light is reflected and vice versa. Fig. 4b-d plot the other combinations of input and output
polarization.
6

Optimal gate operation is attained when the input field is resonant with the QD, which
occurs at a wavelength of 920.96 nm as indicated by the blue vertical line in Fig. 4a. We
calculate the probability table for the quantum gate at this operating condition, which is
shown in Fig. 4e. Details of the calculations are provided in Supplementary section 6.
When the QD is in state |-, the probability of a bit flip is given by PHV0.93±0.03 and
PVH0.98±0.04, which give the gate fidelity (the probability of being in the correct
output state) for the two input polarizations.

The small reduction from ideal gate

operation is attributed to spontaneous emission of |- state as previously discussed. When
the QD is in state |g, the gate fidelities are given by PVV0.58±0.04 and
PHH0.61±0.07. The reduction in gate fidelity in this case is due to finite cooperativity
and spectral wandering, as consistent with the contrast measured in Fig. 2b under
monochromatic excitation.
In conclusion, we have shown that a solid-state qubit composed of a QD strongly coupled
to an optical cavity can conditionally flip the polarization of a photon on picosecond
timescales. This operation implements a cNOT gate, an important enabler for robust and
scalable quantum networks6-8. A cPHASE gate can also be attained by orienting the
incident photon polarization parallel to the cavity axis, instead of 45o, providing a method
for creating strong photon-photon interactions11.

Improved switching contrast and

greater gate speed could be attained by utilizing photonic crystal cavity designs with
smaller mode volumes31, and by performing better alignment of the QD with the high
field mode of the cavity21. The method demonstrated in this work can also be extended
to solid-state qubits that utilize electron and hole spins of charged QDs, which exhibit
significantly longer coherence time13-17. The current device implementation could further
be transitioned to a planar integrated architecture by using a waveguide coupled cavityQD system in the strong coupling regime32. Incorporation of local tuning methods such
as the quantum confined Stark effect could further enable resonant cavity coupling of
multiple QDs in an integrated device33, providing a potential photonic platform for
development of quantum information processors on a chip.

7

Methods
Device fabrication: The sample consisted of 160 nm GaAs layer on top of 1µm
aluminium gallium arsenide (AlGaAs) sacrificial layer grown by molecular beam epitaxy.
A single layer of self-assembled InAs QDs (density of 10-50/μm2) was grown in the
center of the GaAs layer. A DBR mirror composed of 10 layers of GaAs and aluminium
arsenide (AlAs) was grown below the photonic crystal layer and acted as a high
reflectivity mirror, enabling the device to behave as a one sided cavity22. Photonic crystal
cavities with a three-hole defect (L3 type cavity) were fabricated using electron beam
lithography, followed by Cl2 based dry etching, and finally wet etch removal of the
AlGaAs sacrificial layer using hydrofluoric acid.

Measurement Setup: The sample was mounted in a continuous flow liquid helium
cryostat and cooled down to a temperature of 4.3 K. The sample mount was surrounded
by a superconducting magnet that can apply magnetic fields of up to 7 T. Sample
excitation and collection was performed by confocal microscopy using an objective lens
with numerical aperture of 0.68. The polarization axis for excitation and collection was
set by a HWP and analysed by a PBS, as illustrated in Fig. 1d. Collected signal was
focused onto a single mode fiber to spatially filter only the cavity-coupled signal and
isolate a single transverse mode, and then measured by a grating spectrometer and
nitrogen cooled CCD camera. The resolution of the spectrometer camera system was
determined to be 7 GHz.

CW measurement: The cavity spectrum was measured using either a broadband LED or
a tunable diode laser. The LED was used as a white light source with dominant emission
in the wavelength range of 900~950 nm. The diode laser had a narrow linewidth (< 300
kHz) that could be continuously tuned between 920 and 940 nm. The high resolution
cavity spectrum in Fig. 2b was measured by continuously sweeping the tunable laser
frequency over the cavity resonance and measuring the reflected laser signal. Each data
point in Fig. 2b was obtained by fitting the measured laser signal with a Gaussian
function where the frequency and scattering intensity of each data point was obtained

8

from the Gaussian fit. Figures 2c-f were obtained by sweeping a diode laser frequency
over the - transition to pump the |- state, while simultaneously probing the cavity
spectrum with the broadband LED. Background noise due to inelastic scattering from the
pump was subtracted in Figs. 2d-f. The contrast of the dip induced by the QD in Fig. 2d
and 2f was measured to be 25% on resonance with the + transition, which was lower
than the measured contrast in Fig. 2b due to limited spectrometer resolution as well as
off-resonant excitation of the + transition by the pump laser.

Pump-probe pulse measurement: The pump and probe were generated using two time
synchronized Ti:Sapphire lasers. The sample was maintained at 4.3 K, and a magnetic
field of 3-5 T was applied depending on the detuning between the QD and cavity. The
lasers were synchronized by a piezo feedback in the probe laser cavity which locked its
clock frequency to the pump laser with an accuracy of 100 fs. The delay between the
pump and probe was controlled electronically by a phase-lock loop in the synchronization
electronics. The pump pulse duration, initially 2 ps, was expanded to 10 ps by spectral
filtering and the probe pulse duration, initially 5 ps, was filtered to 75 ps using separate
grating spectrometers. After filtering, the probe beam passed through an intensity
stabilizer to keep the intensity constant. The pump-probe delay was measured by single
photon avalanche photodiode with 30 ps resolution. The probe beam power was set to 1
nW measured before the objective lens. The coupling efficiency of the probe into the
cavity mode was previously measured to be 0.16%34. This efficiency, along with the
laser repetition rate of 76 MHz indicates that the mean number of probe photons per
pulse coupled to the cavity is 0.1. In addition to the probe signal detected in the CCD, an
inelastic scattering of the pump was observed. This background, measured to be about 5%
at the π pump pulse condition and increased to 14% at 3π pump condition, was subtracted
in Fig. 3.

Measurement of complete input-output relation for photon polarizations: A HWP
placed between the PBS and the objective lens was used to rotate the input photon
polarization to either H or V. After reflection the photon underwent a second pass
through the HWP due to the optical configuration of the setup. When the HWP was
9

oriented at 0°, a detection event from the transmitted port of the PBS corresponded to a
photon polarized in the H direction after reflection, while a detection event from the
reflected port corresponded to V polarization. In contrast, when the HWP was rotated 45°
a detection event at the transmission port of the PBS corresponded to a V polarized
photon after reflection from the cavity, while the reflection port corresponded to an H
polarized photon. This additional rotation was taken into account in the data in Fig. 4a
and 4d.

References
1

2
3
4
5
6

7
8
9
10

11
12
13

14

Cirac, J. I., Zoller, P., Kimble, H. J. & Mabuchi, H. Quantum State Transfer and
Entanglement Distribution among Distant Nodes in a Quantum Network. Physical
Review Letters 78, 3221-3224 (1997).
Knill, E., Laflamme, R. & Milburn, G. J. A scheme for efficient quantum
computation with linear optics. Nature 409, 46-52 (2001).
Politi, A., Cryan, M. J., Rarity, J. G., Yu, S. & O'Brien, J. L. Silica-on-Silicon
Waveguide Quantum Circuits. Science 320, 646-649 (2008).
Chang, D. E., Sorensen, A. S., Demler, E. A. & Lukin, M. D. A single-photon
transistor using nanoscale surface plasmons. Nat Phys 3, 807-812 (2007).
Hwang, J. et al. A single-molecule optical transistor. Nature 460, 76-80 (2009).
Childress, L., Taylor, J. M., Sørensen, A. S. & Lukin, M. D. Fault-Tolerant
Quantum Communication Based on Solid-State Photon Emitters. Physical Review
Letters 96, 070504 (2006).
Waks, E. & Vuckovic, J. Dipole Induced Transparency in Drop-Filter CavityWaveguide Systems. Physical Review Letters 96, 153601 (2006).
van Loock, P. et al. Hybrid Quantum Repeater Using Bright Coherent Light.
Physical Review Letters 96, 240501 (2006).
Rauschenbeutel, A. et al. Coherent Operation of a Tunable Quantum Phase Gate
in Cavity QED. Physical Review Letters 83, 5166-5169 (1999).
Volz, J., Gehr, R., Dubois, G., Esteve, J. & Reichel, J. Measurement of the
internal state of a single atom without energy exchange. Nature 475, 210-213
(2011).
Duan, L. M. & Kimble, H. J. Scalable Photonic Quantum Computation through
Cavity-Assisted Interactions. Physical Review Letters 92, 127902 (2004).
Li, X. et al. An all-optical quantum gate in a semiconductor quantum dot. Science
301, 809 (2003).
Press, D., Ladd, T. D., Zhang, B. & Yamamoto, Y. Complete quantum control of
a single quantum dot spin using ultrafast optical pulses. Nature 456, 218-221
(2008).
Xu, X. et al. Optically controlled locking of the nuclear field via coherent darkstate spectroscopy. Nature 459, 1105-1109 (2009).

10

15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

26
27

28
29

30

31
32

33

Brunner, D. et al. A Coherent Single-Hole Spin in a Semiconductor. Science 325,
70-72 (2009).
Latta, C. et al. Confluence of resonant laser excitation and bidirectional quantumdot nuclear-spin polarization. Nat Phys 5, 758-763 (2009).
Vamivakas, A. N. et al. Observation of spin-dependent quantum jumps via
quantum dot resonance fluorescence. Nature 467, 297-300 (2010).
Reithmaier, J. P. et al. Strong coupling in a single quantum dot-semiconductor
microcavity system. Nature 432, 197-200 (2004).
Yoshie, T. et al. Vacuum Rabi splitting with a single quantum dot in a photonic
crystal nanocavity. Nature 432, 200-203 (2004).
Peter, E. et al. Exciton-Photon Strong-Coupling Regime for a Single Quantum
Dot Embedded in a Microcavity. Physical Review Letters 95, 067401 (2005).
Hennessy, K. et al. Quantum nature of a strongly coupled single quantum dotcavity system. Nature 445, 896-899 (2007).
Englund, D. et al. Controlling cavity reflectivity with a single quantum dot.
Nature 450, 857-861 (2007).
Srinivasan, K. & Painter, O. Linear and nonlinear optical spectroscopy of a
strongly coupled microdisk-quantum dot system. Nature 450, 862-865 (2007).
Englund, D. et al. Ultrafast Photon-Photon Interaction in a Strongly Coupled
Quantum Dot-Cavity System. Physical Review Letters 108, 093604 (2012).
Bose, R., Sridharan, D., Kim, H., Solomon, G. S. & Waks, E. Low-PhotonNumber Optical Switching with a Single Quantum Dot Coupled to a Photonic
Crystal Cavity. Physical Review Letters 108, 227402 (2012).
Volz, T. et al. Ultrafast all-optical switching by single photons. Nat Photon 6,
607-611 (2012).
Nomura, M., Kumagai, N., Iwamoto, S., Ota, Y. & Arakawa, Y. Laser oscillation
in a strongly coupled single-quantum-dot-nanocavity system. Nat Phys 6, 279-283
(2010).
Reitzenstein, S. et al. Exciton spin state mediated photon-photon coupling in a
strongly coupled quantum dot microcavity system. Phys Rev B 82, 121306 (2010).
Förstner, J., Weber, C., Danckwerts, J. & Knorr, A. Phonon-Assisted Damping of
Rabi Oscillations in Semiconductor Quantum Dots. Physical Review Letters 91,
127401 (2003).
Ramsay, A. J. A review of the coherent optical control of the exciton and spin
states of semiconductor quantum dots. Semiconductor Science and Technology
25, 103001 (2010).
Ohta, R. et al. Strong coupling between a photonic crystal nanobeam cavity and a
single quantum dot. Appl Phys Lett 98, 173104-173103 (2011).
Bose, R., Sridharan, D., Solomon, G. S. & Waks, E. Observation of strong
coupling through transmission modification of a cavity-coupled photonic crystal
waveguide. Opt. Express 19, 5398-5409 (2011).
Faraon, A., Majumdar, A., Kim, H., Petroff, P. & Vučković, J. Fast Electrical
Control of a Quantum Dot Strongly Coupled to a Photonic-Crystal Cavity.
Physical Review Letters 104, 047402 (2010).

11

34

Bose, R., Sridharan, D., Solomon, G. S. & Waks, E. Large optical Stark shifts in
semiconductor quantum dots coupled to photonic crystal cavities. Appl Phys Lett
98, 121109 (2011).

Acknowledgments: The authors would like to acknowledge support from the ARO
MURI on Hybrid quantum interactions (grant number W911NF09104), the Physics
Frontier Center at the Joint Quantum Institute, and the ONR Applied Electromagnetics
center. E. W. would like to acknowledge support from an NSF CAREER award (grant
number ECCS. 0846494) and a DARPA Young Faculty Award (grant number
N660011114121).

Author Contributions: H.K. and E.W. conceived and designed the experiment, and
prepared the manuscript. H.K. carried out the measurement and analyzed the data. R.B.
and T.C.S. contributed to the measurement and sample design. E.W. and H.K. carried out
the theoretical analysis. G.S.S. provided samples grown by molecular beam epitaxy.

Author

Information: The

authors

declare

no

competing

financial

interests.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to edowaks@umd.edu.

12

Figure 1 Implementation of a QD-photon cNOT operation. a. Energy level structure of a neutral
QD under a magnetic field. b. SEM image of the fabricated device and the cavity axis relative to
the photon polarization. c. Illustration of cNOT operation: The polarization of an incident photon
is preserved when the QD is in state |g (top), and is rotated when the QD is in state |- (bottom).
The horizontal dashed line indicates the degenerate energy level of |+ QD state and the cavity
photon state, which are split into two polariton states |Π+ and |Π- in the strong coupling regime.
d. Measurement setup. Pump and probe polarization is selected and measured using a polarizing
beam splitter (PBS) and a half-wave plate (HWP). A flip mirror (FM) is used to direct the probe
signal from either the transmitted or reflected port of the PBS to a single mode fiber (SMF) and
then to a grating spectrometer. OL: objective lens, BS: beam splitter and M: mirror.

13

Figure 2 Device characterizations under cw excitation. a. Cavity spectrum measured by a
broadband LED as a function of magnetic field at temperature of 4.3 K. b. Cavity spectrum
measured by a tunable narrowband laser diode at 1.6 T of magnetic field. The red solid line is a
fit to a theoretical model. c. Cavity spectrum measured by a broadband LED as a function of
diode pump laser frequency which is swept across the - transition of the QD at magnetic field of
1.6 T. When the pump laser is resonant with the - transition, the dip induced by the QD is
inhibited. d-f. Cavity spectrum for pump laser detuning of L/2 = 10, 0 and -10 GHz,
respectively relative to the - transition.

14

Figure 3 Demonstration of controlled bit flip by pulsed pump-probe excitation. a. Blue circles
(red squares) plot the change in measured intensity of the probe signal along the H polarization
direction as a function of

P at 80 ps (4 ns) pump-probe delay time. b-e. Probe signal intensity

(H polarized) as a function of excitation wavelength at 0, , 2 and 3 pumping conditions. Blue
circles: 80 ps delay, red squares: 4 ns delay. Solid lines are fits to a theoretical model.

15

Figure 4 CNOT operations for all four combinations of input-output polarizations. a-d. Cavity
spectra are measured with a  pump pulse for 80 ps (blue circles) and 4 ns (red squares) pumpprobe delay for four possible combinations of input polarization |ain and measured polarization
|bout where a,b  [ H, V ]. Solid lines are fits to a theoretical model. e. Measured probability Pab
when QD is pumped to state |- by a -pulse (top) and when it has relaxed back to state |g
(bottom).

16

Supplementary Material: A quantum logic gate between a solid-state
quantum bit and a photon
Hyochul Kim1, Ranojoy Bose1, Thomas C. Shen1, Glenn S. Solomon2 & Edo Waks1, 2,*
(1)

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, IREAP, University of

Maryland, College Park and Joint Quantum Institute, University of Maryland, College
Park, Maryland 20742, USA
(2)

Joint Quantum Institute, National Institute of Standards and Technology, and

University of Maryland, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899, USA
*

edowaks@umd.edu

1. Supplementary Methods

Details of device design and fabrication: The photonic crystal cavity is composed of a
three-hole defect (L3) cavity as shown in Supplementary Fig. S1. The lattice constant of
the photonic crystal was set to a=240 nm, the hole radius was set to r=70 nm, and the
membrane thickness of the gallium arsenide (GaAs) slab was 160 nm. The positions of
holes A, B, and C indicated in Fig. S1 were shifted by 42 nm, 6 nm, and 42 nm to
optimize the cavity quality factor1,2. The cavity decay rate was measured to be /2π=31.9
GHz, which corresponds to a cavity quality factor of 10,200. The cavity mode volume
was calculated using finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations to be V=0.8

Supplementary Figure S1. Scanning electron micrograph image of a GaAs L3 photonic crystal
cavity.

17

(λcav/n)3, where cav is the wavelength of the cavity resonance and n=3.6 is the refractive
index of GaAs.
Photonic crystal cavities were patterned on a GaAs membrane that contained a single
layer of indium arsenide (InAs) quantum dots (QDs) with a QD density of 10-50/μm2.
The ground state emission of the QDs varied from approximately 900-950 nm.
Considering the small mode volume of the cavities, a strongly coupled QD was found in
roughly 5-10% of the devices. The spontaneous emission lifetime and the coherence time
of InAs QDs at 4 K has been reported in a number of previous works3-5 to be around 5001,000 ps and 400-600 ps, respectively.

Second order correlation measurement: A second order correlation measurement was
performed to verify that we are working with a single QD. A pulse laser with the
repetition rate of 76 MHZ was used to excite the cavity resonantly while the QD was
detuned by 0.8 nm. The pulsed laser excited the QD through a phonon mediated nonresonant energy transfer6. The QD emission was filtered by a spectrometer grating and
sent to the Hanbury Brown-Twiss (HBT) setup composed of a 50/50 beamsplitter and
two avalanche photodiodes. Detection events from the counters were processed using a
time interval analyser to obtain the correlation measurement. The results of the second
order correlation measurement are shown in Supplementary Fig. S2, which plots g2()
both for a pulsed laser input and for the QD emission. The QD emission shows a nearly
complete suppression of the =0 case, confirming that the emission is coming from a
single QD.

18

Supplementary Figure S2. Second order correlation measurement of the QD emission (bottom)
and the excitation pulse laser (top).

2. Calculation of cavity reflection coefficient
The cavity reflection coefficient can be directly calculated using cavity input-output
formalism7. Supplementary Fig. S3 shows the definitions of the cavity input and output
field operators, along with the definitions of the polarization axes. Photonic crystal L3
cavities have a well-defined polarization axis along the direction orthogonal to the row
defect1. We define aˆ x and aˆ y as bosonic input flux operators7 for a photon that is parallel
and orthogonal to the polarization axis of the cavity respectively. The flux operators can
also be expressed in the H-V basis, rotated 45o relative to the cavity polarization axis, via
the relations

19

Supplementary Figure S3. Definition of polarization angles and input and output
modes in theoretical model.

aˆ H 

aˆ V 

aˆ x  aˆ y

(1)

2
aˆ y  aˆ x

(2)

2

The cavity output operators bˆ x and bˆ y in the polarization basis of the cavity are related
to the input operators by the cavity input-output relations
bˆ x  aˆ x   aˆ

(3)

bˆ y  aˆ y

(4)

where â is the bosonic annihilation operator for a cavity photon. Eq. 4 shows that the
reflection coefficient for a photon polarized in the y direction is ry  1 , which is expected
because a y-polarized photon does not couple to the cavity and simply reflects from the
sample surface. The reflection coefficient for a photon polarized along the x-axis is more
complicated, and depends on the interaction between the QD and the cavity. It has been
derived in a number of previous works using various approaches8-10. For completeness,
we provide a derivation below using Heisenberg-Langevin formalism.

20

In order to derive the reflection coefficient for an x-polarized photon, an expression must
be attained for the cavity operator â .

This expression can be attained from the

Heisenberg-Langevin equations of motion for an atomic system coupled to an optical
cavity11. We derive this expression in the limit that the   transition is highly detuned
from the cavity mode, and is therefore optically decoupled from the cavity. Thus, the
cavity reflection coefficient is dominated by the interaction with the   transition. The
Hamiltonian for a closed cavity mode coupled to a two-level atom is described by
H  ca†a 

a
2

ˆ  g  a†sˆ  sˆ †a 
w

(5)

ˆ     g g
In the above, sˆ  g  is defined as the QD lowering operator, and w

is the population difference operator. The frequencies c and a are the cavity and QD
resonant frequencies respectively, while g is the cavity-QD coupling strength. In order to
include losses in both the cavity and QD, as well as cavity excitation, we apply the
Heisenberg-Langevin formalism11 to attain the Heisenberg-Langevin equations of motion

daˆ


   i c   aˆ  igsˆ   aˆ x
dt
2


(6)

 spon 

dsˆ
   i a 
waˆ
 sˆ  ig ˆ
dt
2 


(7)





ˆ
dw
ˆ  Iˆ  2ig  aˆ †sˆ  sˆ †aˆ 
  spon w
dt

(8)

where  is the cavity decay rate, spon is the QD spontaneous emission rate, and aˆ x is the
cavity input operator defined in Fig. S3 which drives the cavity mode. In the above
equations we have assumed that the input field spectrum is centered around a frequency
, and have transformed the equations of motion to the reference frame rotating at this
field frequency. We defined c  c   and a  a   .

Eq. (8) can be directly

integrated to give

21



(9)

ˆ  2ig  aˆ †sˆ  sˆ †aˆ dt '
R


(10)

ˆ t   w
ˆ 0e
w

spont



 e

 spont

ˆ
 1 Iˆ  R

where
t

0

To proceed, the initial state of the QD, which can be either |g or |-, must be specified.
These two cases are considered individually below for the case where the input field is
monochromatic. The solution will then be extended to non-monochromatic fields so that
it can be applied to both pulsed and broadband continuous wave input fields.
QD is in state |g: Inserting Eq. (9) into Eq. (7) and taking the expectation of both sides
we attain



   ic   aˆ  ig sˆ   aˆ x
dt
2


(11)

 spon 

ˆ
   i a 
 sˆ  ig aˆ  Raˆ
dt
2



(12)

d aˆ

d sˆ

In the above equation, we used the fact that the QD is initially in the state |g which
ˆ  O
ˆ for any operator Ô . We consider the limit that there is only
ˆ 0O
means that w

one excitation in the system. This regime, called the weak field limit, is exact if the input
field is a single photon state. It also provides an accurate approximation to the cavity
response if the cavity is excited by a weak coherent field with an average photon number
ˆ ˆ  0 . This result can be
that is much less than 1. In the weak field limit we have Ra
ˆ ˆ annihilates two excitations
understood using Eq. (10) which shows that the operator Ra

(an excitation can be either a cavity photon or a QD exciton), and then creates a single
excitation. If there is only one excitation in the entire system, this term will always
annihilate the initial state and therefore does not contribute.
Within the weak field regime, the dipole moment and average cavity field are related by a
system of linear constant coefficient differential equations given by
22



   ic   aˆ  ig sˆ   aˆ x
dt
2


d aˆ

d sˆ
dt

(13)

   i a    sˆ  ig aˆ

(14)

where   spon / 2  1/ T2 is the QD homogeneous linewidth and T2 is the pure dephasing
time, which has been introduced into the mean operator equations using the random
phase jump approach12. We consider here the case where the mean input field aˆ x is a
monochromatic field. In this limit one can solve for the mean cavity field by taking the
steady-state solution to the above equations. This solution is given by

aˆ 

  i a   
aˆ
 ic   / 2  ia     g 2 x

(15)

Taking the expectation of both sides of Eq. (3) and inserting Eq. (15) we attain the
relation bˆ x    r   aˆ x   where

r    1 

  i a   
 ic   / 2 i a     g 2

(16)

For the special case where both the QD and field are resonant with the cavity, we have
a  c  0 and the reflection coefficient takes on the simplified expression
r   

C 1
C 1

(17)

where C  2 g 2 /  is the atomic cooperativity, which is the expression quoted in the
main manuscript.
QD is in state |-: We consider the limit where the lifetime of state |- is long compared
to the temporal dynamics of all input fields. In this limit the QD will remain in state |-
throughout the entire time that the input field is interacting with the cavity. Thus, sˆ  0
at all time, and Eq. (13) simplifies to

23



   i c   aˆ   aˆ x
dt
2


d aˆ

(18)

The above equation is that of a bare cavity driven by an input field, and is exact both in
the weak and strong field limit. For a monochromatic field, we can once again take the
steady-state solution given by

aˆ 


aˆ x
i c   / 2

(19)

Taking the expectation of both sides of Eq. (3) and inserting the Eq. (19) we attain the
relation bˆ x    r   aˆ x   where

r    1 


i c   / 2

(20)

For the special case where the input field is resonant with the cavity ( c  0 ), we have
r    1 .

Conversion of results to H/V basis: The above results can be expressed in the H-V basis
using the relation

ˆ
ˆ
ˆb  b x  b y
H
2

(21)

bˆ y  bˆ x
bˆ V 
2

(22)

Taking the expectation values of the above equations along with the relations bˆ y  aˆ y
and bˆ y  r   aˆ y as well as Eq. (1) and Eq. (2) we attain the relations
1  r  
1  r  
bˆ H 
aˆ H 
aˆ V
2
2

(23)

1  r  
1  r  
bˆ V 
aˆ H 
aˆ V
2
2

(24)

24

The above relations enable us to calculate the output field amplitudes as a function of the
input field amplitudes along the H and V axes.
Extension to non-monochromatic fields: The previous results were calculated in the
limit of a monochromatic input field. This result can be extended to non-monochromatic
fields in a straightforward way.

In the weak-field limit, the cavity-QD system is

described by a system of constant-coefficient differential equations and is therefore a
linear system. Thus, for a non-monochromatic field each frequency component will
interact with the cavity independently. The response of the field can be directly attained
by performing Fourier decomposition of the input field and calculating the reflectivity of
each frequency component independently. That is, we can write
aˆ x  t     x   eit d

(25)

bˆ x  t    r    x   eit d

(26)

where  x   is the Fourier component of the field amplitude. We then have

Similarly, along the y axis we have r    1 and hence
bˆ y  t     y   eit d

(27)

The above amplitudes can be expressed in the H/V basis using the same approach as for
the monochromatic field, which leads to the expressions
1  r  
1  r   

bˆ H  t    
 H   
V   eit d
2
 2


(28)

1  r  
1  r   

bˆ V  t    
 H   
V   eit d
2
 2


(29)

Most of the time, we are primarily interested in the total energy reflected by the cavity
(i.e. average number of reflected photons per pulse). This value can be attained using
Parseval’s theorem which states

25

1  r  
1  r  
1
WH 



 V   d


H
 2
2 
2

(30)

1  r  
1  r  
1
WV 
 H   
 V   d

2 
2
2

(31)

2



2



If the input field is vertically polarized we have  v    0 and the above equations
simplify to


WV H  




WV V  



1  r  

2

2
1  r  

SinV  d

(32)

SinV  d

(33)

2

2

where SinV     v   / 2 is the input power spectrum. Similarly, if the input field is
2

horizontally polarized we can write


WH H  




WH V  



1  r  

2

2
1  r  
2

SinH  d

(34)

SinH  d

(35)

2

where SinH     H   / 2 .
2

3. Numerical fit of reflection spectrum
To this point, the QD linewidth was assumed to be homogeneously broadened. Real QDs
exhibit spectral diffusion where the QD frequency wanders on timescales that are long
compared to the laser repetition rate, but short compared to the total measurement time.
Spectral diffusion in a QD coupled to a photonic crystal cavity has been reported in
previous work, and may be due to proximity of the QD to surface13 as well as thermal
fluctuation14. This spectral diffusion can be modelled by setting QD  0   where 0
is the average transition frequency of the   transition, and  is a zero-mean random

26

variable that describes fluctuations in the QD resonant frequency due to spectral diffusion.
With this definition a    QD  0a   becomes a random variable where 0a    0
is the mean detuning between the QD and the cavity. The reflection coefficient given in
Eq. (16) now becomes

r  ,    1 

 i  0a      

(36)

ic   / 2 i  0a        g 2

Calculated results must now be averaged over the possible values of  . Thus, Eq. (32)(35) become




























WV H   P    
WV V   P    

WH H   P    
WH V   P    




1  r  ,  

2

2
1  r  ,  

2

SinV   d d 

(38)

SinH   d d 

(39)

SinH   d d 

(40)

2

2
1  r  ,  

(37)

2

2
1  r  ,  

SinV   d d 

2

where P    is a probability distribution function that characterizes the inhomogeneous
linewidth of the QD.
In Fig. 2b of the main text, a cavity reflectivity measurement was performed with a
vertically polarized input field with a narrowband tunable laser. In this case, the input
field is very close to a monochromatic field with frequency  f so one can substitute
SinV    W0V     f  which results in the relation

27



WV  H  W0V  P   


1  r  f ,  
2

2

d

(41)

To perform calculations we need an expression for the QD lineshape function P    .
Spectral diffusion is often be modelled using a Guassian distribution given by the relation

P  

 2 
exp   2 
2 I2
 2 I 
1

where  I is the inhomogeneous linewidth due to spectral wandering.

(42)
We use this

analytical expression to fit to the experimental data shown in Fig. 2b of the main text.
The variable W0V is treated as a fitting parameter, along with g ,  , and  I , while we set

  spon / 2 where spon  1/ 530 ps1 attained from the Purcell factor measurements (see
Supplementary Section 4 below). This model assumes that the pure dephasing rate of the
QD is negligibly small compared to the inhomogeneous linewidth, which is highly
realistic for our system. The result of the fit is plotted as a solid line in Fig. 2b. The
fitted values correspond to g/2 = 12.9 GHz, /2=31.9 GHz, and I/2 = 5.2 GHz. The
Gaussian model for the inhomogeneous linewidth provides very good agreement with
experimental results.
Theoretical fits for Fig. 3 and 4 were performed using Eq. (37)-(40) using the
approximation that SinV    W0V     f  and SinH    W0H     f  .

These

approximations are valid because the laser bandwidth is only 4.2 GHz, which is small
compared to both  and 2g. In addition, for the cases where the reflected field was
measured in the same polarization direction as the incident field polarization (Fig. 4a and
4d), a frequency dependent background level was observed. This frequency dependent
background was due to imperfect mode matching of the probe to the cavity, along with
the dispersive properties of the polarization optics. These non-idealities in the probing
system resulted in a portion of direct reflection from the slab surface which did not
couple to the cavity. Direct uncoupled reflection is always measured in the same input
and output photon polarization direction because it preserves the polarization of the
incident probe.

To account for this background, a frequency dependent additive

28

background term was added to the fit. The background intensity was expanded to second
order

in

frequency

around

the

cavity

resonance

as

I B    a0  a1   cav   a2   cav  where a0, a1, and a2 were treated as fitting
2

parameters.
4. Qubit lifetime measurement
The qubit lifetime can be modified through the Purcell effect by controlling the detuning
between the - transition and the cavity. Supplementary Fig. S4 plots the change in the
probe signal intensity as a function of pump-probe delay time for different detunings (Δ)
between the - transition and the cavity. The pump was set to the π-pulse power and
tuned to resonance with the - transition. The detuning was adjusted by utilizing a slow
red-shift of the cavity which was observed during the course of the measurements due to
gradual condensation of residual gas deposition on the photonic crystal nanocavity at a
cryogenic temperature15,16. A slow red shift of 0.1~0.3 nm was observed over several
hours, which could be recovered after warming up and cooling back down. By taking
measurements at different times relative to the initial cooldown, it was possible to adjust
the detuning between the QD and the cavity mode. The magnetic field was set for each
value of the cavity resonant frequency so that the + transition was resonant with the
cavity and the probe beam frequency was set to the + transition frequency.
All measurements were taken at a temperature of 4.3 K.

For the qubit lifetime

measurements, a shorter probe pulse of 22 ps was generated using a tunable Fabry-Perot
cavity. Shorter probe pulses were utilized in these measurements in order to improve
temporal resolution. Supplementary Fig. S4a shows lifetime measurements for three
different QD detunings of 113 GHz, 169 GHz, and 230 GHz. Data points represent
experimental measurements while the solid lines represent an exponential fit, which was
used to determine the lifetime of the |- state. The measured lifetime of the three
detunings are given by 230 ps, 350 ps, and 460 ps respectively. Fig. S4b plots QD
lifetime vs QD detuning along with a theoretical fit to the predicted value given by σ=4g2/(4Δ2+2)+0, where 0 is a fitting parameter that accounts for nonradiative decay
as well as radiative decay into leaky modes. From the fit we determine 1/0=530 ps.
29

Supplementary Figure S4. Qubit lifetime measurement. a. Measured probe intensity
as a function of pump-probe delay. Solid lines are fits to an exponential decay
function. Fitted lifetimes are 1/σ-= 460 ps for the black curve, 350 ps for the red
curve, and 230 ps for the green curve. b. Measured (red circles) lifetime as a function
of QD (-)-cavity detuning (Δ/2π). A black solid line plots a theoretical fit.

5. Probability of QD excitation after a  pulse
In Fig. 3c of the main text, blue circles correspond to measurements taken 80 ps after a 
pulse, while red squares are obtained for a 4 ns delay where the QD has fully relaxed
back to state |g. The solid red curve represents a numerical fit of Eq. (37) to the data of
4 ns delay, which we define as WVgH    . We defined WVH    as the ideal intensity
distribution when the QD is in state |- with unity probability throughout the interaction
time of the photonic qubit (i.e. when the QD is fully decoupled from the cavity). This
distribution is obtained by taking the numerical fit to WVgH    and setting g=0, as
plotted by the blue curve in Fig. 3c.
Fig. 3c shows that the experimental data for 80 ps delay does not attain the maximum
value predicted by WVH    . We attribute this degradation to a small probability that the
QD has relaxed back down to state |g before the photonic qubit has finished interacting
with the cavity-QD system. We define  as the probability that the QD is in state |-
when the photonic qubit is reflected from the cavity. We then define a new distribution

30

WVH     WVH     (1   )WVgH    which represents a statistical mixture for the

case where the QD is in state |- with probability  and state |g with probability 1-. We
treat  as a fitting parameter while fixing all other parameters to values attained from
WVgH    (the red curve), and use this distribution to fit the 80 ps delay data (blue

circles). From the fit we obtain =0.93±0.04. At =920.97 nm (the cavity resonant
wavelength), we have WVH / WVH  0.95  0.03 .
6. Calculation of probability table
We use the data plotted in Fig. 4 of the main text to calculate Pij where i,j[H,V].
Supplementary Fig. S5 shows the identical graphs as in the Fig. 4(a) and (c) in the main
manuscript, where we have defined the relevant intensities used to calculate the
probability table. Fig. S5(a) is the case where the input field is horizontally polarized and
the output field is measured in the vertically polarized basis.

The solid red curve

represents a numerical fit of Eq. (40) to the data of 4 ns delay (red squares), which we
define as WHgV    . In order to calculate the probabilities, we need to know the intensity
I0, which is the reflected intensity at cavity resonant frequency attained when the QD is in
state |- with unity probability. This value can be attained from the peak value of
WHV    , defined in Supplementary section 5, which gives the ideal intensity

distribution when the QD is fully excited to state |-.
Similar to Supplementary section 5, we define WHV     WHV     (1   )WHgV   
which represents a statistical mixture of distributions for the case where the QD can
either be in state |- or state |g, where  is the probability of the QD being in state |-.
This distribution is used to fit the 80 ps delay data (blue circles), and the result is plotted
as the black line in Fig. S5(a).

The green dashed line plots the distribution

WHV     lim WHgV    which represents the ideal case where the cavity-QD
g 

coupling strength is extremely large. This curve does not completely drop to zero
because of a small background level, which is about 1% of I0.

31

Fig. S5(b) shows the case where the input field is vertically polarized and is measured in
the vertical polarization basis. The distributions WVgV    , WVV    , WVV    , and
WVV    (defined in the identical way to panel a) are plotted as well. We note that I0

does not go all the way down to zero due to the presence of a background intensity level.
This background is due to direct uncoupled reflection from the slab surface that is not
fully rejected by the single-mode fiber mode filter. The background level indicated as Ibg
is 19% of ideal cavity scattering signal ( I   I 0 ), which is higher than the 1%
background observed in Fig. S5(a). The reason for this difference in background levels is
that direct surface reflection is observed significantly in the port that measures the same
input and output polarization (Fig. S5b) and is not observed in the orthogonal polarization
(Fig. S5a) because surface reflection will not rotate the photon polarization. The actual
value of the background is strongly depends on the focusing condition onto the cavity and
single mode fiber, as well as the optical alignment.

Supplementary Figure S5. Duplication of Fig 4(a) and (c) in main manuscript.
Cavity spectra are measured with a π pump pulse for 80 ps (blue circles) and 4 ns
(red squares) pump-probe delay for (a) input polarization of |Hin and measured
polarizations of |Vout and (b) |Vin and |Vout.

Red curve plots distribution for

g

Wi 
j    , blue curve plots the distribution for Wi  j    , black curve plots


Wi j    , and green curve plots Wi 
j    where (i,j)=(H,V) for panel a and

(i,j)=(V,V) for panel b.

32

0
We define Pi 
j as the probability that a photon with initial polarization state i[H,V] is

detected in the polarization direction j[H,V] when the QD is in state |g. Similarly, Pi  j
is defined as the probability for the case where a  pulse has been applied to the QD. The
0

probability is defined as Pi 
j   I g  I   /  I 0  I   and Pi  j   I  I   /  I 0  I   for the

case that input and output photon polarizations are orthogonal (Fig. S5a), and
0

Pi 
j   I g  I 0  /  I   I 0  and Pi  j   I  I 0  /  I   I 0  for the case where the input and

output photon polarizations are same (Fig. S5b). Here, I g , I , I  , and I 0 are the
reflected intensity attained for the red, black, green and blue curves at cavity resonant
wavelength (920.96 nm) as indicated in Fig. S5. A table of all calculated probabilities is
shown below. Error values are determined from a 95% confidence bound of the
numerical fits.
QD state\ Probability

PVV

PVH

PHV

PHH

(| ⟩
(| ⟩

0.58 ±0.04

0.38 ±0.03

0.35 ±0.03

0.61 ±0.07

0.10 ±0.07

0.98 ±0.04

0.93 ±0.03

0.07 ±0.07

Table 1 Experiementally measured probabilities Pij where i,j[H,V] for the two
possible states of the control bit (|g and |-).

References
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Akahane, Y., Asano, T., Song, B.-S. & Noda, S. High-Q photonic nanocavity in a
two-dimensional photonic crystal. Nature 425, 944-947 (2003).
Akahane, Y., Asano, T., Song, B.-S. & Noda, S. Fine-tuned high-Q photoniccrystal nanocavity. Opt. Express 13, 1202-1214 (2005).
Borri, P. et al. Ultralong Dephasing Time in InGaAs Quantum Dots. Physical
Review Letters 87, 157401 (2001).
Flagg, E. B. et al. Interference of Single Photons from Two Separate
Semiconductor Quantum Dots. Physical Review Letters 104, 137401 (2010).
Matthiesen, C., Vamivakas, A. N. & Atatüre, M. Subnatural Linewidth Single
Photons from a Quantum Dot. Physical Review Letters 108, 093602 (2012).
Ates, S. et al. Non-resonant dot-cavity coupling and its potential for resonant
single-quantum-dot spectroscopy. Nat Photon 3, 724-728 (2009).
Walls, D. & Milburn, G. Quantum Optics. (Springer, 1994).

33

8
9

10

11
12
13

14
15
16

Waks, E. & Vuckovic, J. Dipole Induced Transparency in Drop-Filter CavityWaveguide Systems. Physical Review Letters 96, 153601 (2006).
Hughes, S. & Kamada, H. Single-quantum-dot strong coupling in a
semiconductor photonic crystal nanocavity side coupled to a waveguide. Phys Rev
B 70, 195313 (2004).
Shen, J.-T. & Fan, S. Theory of single-photon transport in a single-mode
waveguide. I. Coupling to a cavity containing a two-level atom. Phys Rev A 79,
023837 (2009).
Scully, M. O. & Zubairy, M. S. Quantum Optics. (Cambridge University Press,
1997).
Waks, E. & Sridharan, D. Cavity QED treatment of interactions between a metal
nanoparticle and a dipole emitter. Phys Rev A 82, 043845 (2010).
Majumdar, A., Kim, E. D. & Vučković, J. Effect of photogenerated carriers on the
spectral diffusion of a quantum dot coupled to a photonic crystal cavity. Phys Rev
B 84, 195304 (2011).
Englund, D. et al. Controlling cavity reflectivity with a single quantum dot.
Nature 450, 857-861 (2007).
Mosor, S. et al. Scanning a photonic crystal slab nanocavity by condensation of
xenon. Appl Phys Lett 87, 141105 (2005).
Strauf, S. et al. Frequency control of photonic crystal membrane resonators by
monolayer deposition. Appl Phys Lett 88, 043116 (2006).

34

